# Automated Collective Variable Discovery 
Myongin Oh, Margarida Rosa, Hengyi Xie, George Khelashvili at Weill Cornell Medicine. 
Please refer to the paper: DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpj.2024.06.024

## Author Information
- **Author**: MR (Latest Update: May 28, 2024)  
- **Contact Information**: MO (myo4001@med.cornell.edu) MR (mar4026@med.cornell.edu) GK (gek2009@med.cornell.edu) 
If you have any questions or notice any mistakes, please contact us.

## Description
This repository contains scripts for extracting Cartesian coordinates from molecular dynamics trajectories, merging CSV files using pandas, and trimming the dataset based on variance. 

1. **extract_coordinates.tcl**: This Tcl script extracts the Cartesian coordinates of selected residues from a given trajectory. The coordinates will be used in subsequent code for feature calculations, such as pairwise distances.

2. **merging_csv_files.ipynb**: This Jupyter notebook merges CSV files using pandas dataframe.

3. **variance.ipynb**: This Jupyter notebook will calculate features (pairwise distances) and trim the data by excluding features with low variance. 

## Recommendation
For larger systems or depending on available computational resources, it is recommended to use MDAnalysis tools instead of these Tcl scripts. If you use scripts other than the ones we provide, please ensure the output format is consistent with ours so that the subsequent steps can run smoothly. For the MFSD2A system, the provided Tcl script was used. If there are multiple DCD files, the process could be optimized with a bash script.

## Usage

**Prerequisites**:

1. **extract_coordinates.tcl**: VMD (Visual Molecular Dynamics): Ensure VMD is installed on your system. The Tcl script relies on VMD for processing molecular dynamics trajectories.
2. **merging_csv_files.ipynb **: Python 3.x: Make sure Python is installed. 
import pandas 
3. **variance.ipynb**: Python 3.x: Make sure Python is installed.
from sklearn.feature_selection import VarianceThreshold <br>
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt <br>
import gc <br>
import seaborn as sns <br>
import multiprocessing <br>
import kneed <br>

**Installation**: 
pip install pandas <br>
pip install numpy <br>
pip install matplotlib.pyplot <br>
pip install skfeature-chappers <br>
pip install gc-python-utils <br>
pip install seaborn <br>
pip install xgboost <br>
pip install kneed <br>


**Running the Code**:

1. **extract_coordinates.tcl**:
Edit the output/input file names/paths and residue numbers according to your system. You can keep them the same if using our input data.
Run the script using VMD:
   vmd -dispdev text <extract_coordinates.tcl 

Additionally, this script is for extracting CA coordinates. 
CA coordinates: 
for {set i 1} {$i < $nf} {incr i} {
        set distList {}
        animate goto $i
        for {set p $minIndex} {$p <= $maxIndex} {incr p} {
                set pGly [atomselect top "protein and resid [lindex $residList $p] and name CA"]
                if {[$pGly get resname] == "GLY"} {
                        set sel1 [atomselect top "protein and resid [lindex $residList $p] and name CA"]
                        $sel1 frame $i
                        $sel1 update
                } else {
                        set sel1 [atomselect top "protein and resid [lindex $residList $p] and name CA"]
                        $sel1 frame $i
                        $sel1 update

However, it can be quickly modified to calculate residue-residue distances with the following change to the selection criteria: 
for {set i 1} {$i < $nf} {incr i} {
        set distList {}
        animate goto $i
        for {set p $minIndex} {$p <= $maxIndex} {incr p} {
                set pGly [atomselect top "protein and resid [lindex $residList $p] and name CA"]
                if {[$pGly get resname] == "GLY"} {
                        set sel1 [atomselect top "protein and resid [lindex $residList $p] and name HA2"]
                        $sel1 frame $i
                        $sel1 update
                } else {
                        set sel1 [atomselect top "protein and resid [lindex $residList $p] and not (hydrogen or name O C CA N)"]
                        $sel1 frame $i
                        $sel1 update

Repeat step 1 for each class; in this case, three times (OFS, OcS, and IFS)—making sure to edit the paths and file names accordingly.

2. **merging_csv_files**: Run the script in a Python environment or Jupyter Notebook.
Edit the user inputs if you are using your own system. You can keep them the same if you are using our input data.

3. **variance.ipynb**: Run the script in a Python environment or Jupyter Notebook.
Edit the user inputs if you are using your own system. You can keep them the same if you are using our input data.
If you are using our input data, our system is MFSD2A, where the metastable states are 0: OFS, 1: OcS, and 2: IFS.
Make sure to edit the varThresh as calculated by the script using the Kneedle Algorithm (reference: "Finding a 'Kneedle' in a Haystack: Detecting Knee Points in System Behavior").
